The largest organisms on Earth
What is the largest organism living on Earth? How about those that are extinct1 now? These questions are trickier2 than they look. Are they about height, mass, volume or maybe length? Sometimes we can see only a small part of an otherwise huge living creature. Other times you can argue3 that a colony of organisms that behaves4 as one creature also needs to be considered5. Let’s at least try to find out what are the largest creatures in some taxonomic kingdoms6 out there.

We’ll start with the animal kingdom. Of all the living animals the largest one (and also the heaviest one) is the majestic7 blue whale. It’s so large that there are no scales8 available to weigh them as a whole. The heaviest blue whale ever recorded was at 190 tonnes, while the longest was about 33 meters long. It still came shorter than a humble lion’s mane jellyfish that is nearly 37 meters long.

The largest animal to walk on Earth today (or a terrestrial9 animal) is, without a doubt10, the African bush elephant. An adult elephant bull11 weighs almost 11 tons, and stands about 4 meters tall. Both the blue whale and the African elephant are very gentle12 giants. Despite this, sadly, both populations were hurt severely13 by humans. Currently both species14 are considered endangered15.

But what about the extinct species? Everyone knows that some dinosaurs were gigantic! And while the dinosaurs aren’t actually extinct (since modern birds belong to the dinosaur clade16 Theropoda), the largest of them we know about only from fossils17. For example, the famous Tyrannosaurus rex, as scientists speculate, was standing roughly 370 cm tall and was over 12 meters in length! The largest exhibited18 skull of T. rex was just about one and a half meters long. A study on Tyrannosaurus bones was made in 2012. It has revealed that T. rex had the strongest bite of any terrestrial animal, ever! A hungry Tyrannosaurus could bite with the force of more than 50.000 Newtons, which is comparable19 to some modern hydraulic press machines. One of the largest dinosaurs known today though is Giraffatitan. It was a large, plant-eating creature. Its mass could exceed20 70 tons and it was over 20 meters long!

Other large extinct animals include the species called Palaeoloxodon and Paraceratherium. Those were the distant cousins of modern elephants and rhinos. They were the ones of the largest known mammals to walk the Earth, ever.

But wait, animals are not the only living creatures out there! What about plants and other, more basic organisms? For example, an aspen21 grove called Pando located in south-central Utah, U.S., is believed to be a single organism connected by one root system. If this is correct, the size of Pando is 43.6 hectares, or 0.43 km2! It’s at least a few thousand years of age, making it one of the oldest living organisms, too.

And if you want to go wider, a fungus22 named Armillaria ostoyae occupies nearly 9 km2 as a single colony in the woods of Oregon, U.S. If you think about this colony as a single organism, it can be the largest organism in the world by area occupied.

We’re still making many discoveries23 today. And maybe tomorrow we’ll find something that makes all these things small by comparison