SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT
SKIP TO SEARCH
Skip to...
Select

SUBSCRIBE
SIGN IN
Search

Enter News, Quotes, Companies or Videos


CHINA
How the U.S. Misread China’s Xi: Hoping for a Globalist, It Got an Autocrat
Early hopes that Xi Jinping would want closer integration with the U.S.-led global order have become one of the biggest strategic miscalculations of the post-Cold War era
President Xi inspecting troops last year in Beijing.
By Jeremy Page
Dec. 23, 2020 10:06 am ET
TEXT
361 RESPONSES
BEIJING—In the two years before Xi Jinping became China’s leader in 2012, U.S. officials tried to size him up through a series of face-to-face meetings.

During talks in China in 2011, Mr. Xi, then vice president, asked about civilian control of the U.S. military, shared his thoughts on uprisings in the Middle East and spoke, unprompted, about his father, a renowned revolutionary. When he visited the U.S. in 2012, he was relaxed and affable, chatting with students and posing for pictures with Magic Johnson at a Los Angeles Lakers basketball game.

The U.S. officials’ conclusion: Although Mr. Xi was far more confident and forthright than Hu Jintao, the stiff and scripted leader he would succeed, he likely shared his commitment to stable ties with Washington and closer integration with the U.S.-led global order. Some even hoped Mr. Xi would kick-start stalled economic reforms.

It was one of the biggest strategic miscalculations of the post-Cold War era.

In the eight subsequent years, Mr. Xi has pursued an expansive, hypernationalistic vision of China’s future, displaying a desire for control and a talent for political maneuvering. Drawing comparisons to Mao Zedong, he has crushed critics and potential rivals, revitalized the Communist Party and even scrapped presidential term limits so he can, if he chooses, rule for life.

TO READ THE FULL STORY
SUBSCRIBE
SIGN IN
The Wall Street Journal
Continue reading your article with
a WSJ membership
VIEW MEMBERSHIP OPTIONS
Customer CenterSubscriber AgreementPrivacy NoticeCookie Notice© 2020 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.