Going on a Vacation
Your vacation is a great time to have some fun and relax. Or so they say1, anyway. But let’s face it2: preparing for a vacation takes so much effort that in the end you begin to wonder: was it worth it? Let’s have a quick recap3 on what must be done to prepare for a vacation easily and efficiently.

First things first. If you want to travel somewhere, you will need to book4 a ticket. Do this in advance. There is nothing worse than to have all your other stuff in order5 only to find out that there are no tickets to be bought. It’s better to buy your tickets while you still have at least a month before a vacation.

Are you about to meet some people? Take only the things you know you won’t find for free near them. For example, you can probably skip on packing a tenday’s6 worth of water, but you will want to bring your money and maybe some gifts. And vice versa7, if you are going hiking8, leave your laptop behind for now, and instead focus on consumables (food, water and fuel) that you will need during the trip.

Do you want to go to some wild place that is far away from civilization? Join an online community of people that frequent9 the places you are about to visit. Pay attention to what they say about the place and don’t be afraid to ask for advice. There is literally nothing worse than being stuck in the middle of nowhere10 with no course of action to back you up. Mental preparation and careful planning are important for your trip as much as actual physical things that you will be carrying with you.

No matter where you go, leave some sort of a note to some person that you trust. Even if your trip is really casual, incidents can happen, phone batteries can die down, and things in general never go exactly as you plan them out to be. It is good to have someone know at least roughly11 where you will be at any given point of time, just in case12.

The important thing is to not lose the big picture13. All this preparation is not your actual goal. Your actual goal is to have a good time on your vacation. If you suddenly see that you stress out over something, take a break14 and do something else in the meantime. And when you finally begin your trip, make each day count