Banking
Banks are financial institutions that provide customers with a variety of valuable services, including the ability to wire money to a person or company, the ability to store money in a checking or savings account, the ability to collect interest on investments, the ability to receive loans, and much more.

Banks are most commonly used by customers who wish to store their money and access it as needed, with a debit card (a card that's simply attached to the funds in one's account), or checks (individually numbered paper slips that can be used to designate a transfer of funds). Checking and savings accounts are the primary means of storing money in a bank; a checking account is designed to house money that will be spent, while a savings account is designed to house money that will be saved. Banks usually pay a small amount of interest, or a payment in the form of a percentage of a customer's deposited balance, to customers. This is their way of showing support for clients who entrust them with their money.

These funds are then used by banks, along with their credit, to perform other functions and offer additional services. For example, many customers use banks to secure home mortgages, or multiyear loans through which ownership (or equity) of a home is achieved. Customers demonstrate that they're able to pay a mortgage back (usually by providing proof of income and investments, in addition to a down payment, or a lump sum paid up front), and select a time period for this mortgage; short mortgage payment periods require larger monthly payments, but customers are charged less interest, while longer mortgage payment periods require smaller monthly payments, but customers are charged more interest.

Lastly, many banking customers request a personal loan. Personal loans are loans issued and approved by financial experts that're designed to be used by customers for specific purposes. For example, one may secure a personal loan for a business plan or an automobile. Personal loans, like home mortgages, are issued based upon a customer's ability to pay the borrowed sum back; banks also charge a small amount of interest, meaning in this case a percentage of the borrowed money extra, besides its core balance.